readme.md, before:

## Modeling and reasonging about information transfer in biological and artificial organisms.

This is a summary of my paper "Perception and Time in AGI".

One way of learning about any system is to divide it into parts and study interactions among the parts.  To model information flow in organisms they can be thought of as collections of observers receiving information from the outside world and "transmitting information" from one observer to another.  A neuron is an example of an observer.  However, in my theory I use words "change" and "action" instead of "receiving information" and "transmitting information".  This is a fundamental difference.  

Observation of processes in the world (everything outside of a single observer including other observers) changes that observer.  There are many mechanisms of change.  What changes within the observer is called "internal state".  State can be matter in the real world observers or bits in artificial ones.  Internal state is dilimited from the world by a boundary that defines the observer.  The boundaries can change over time, overlap or contain one another.  Information travels across the boundaries via numerous mechanisms that change the internal state.

When processes originating in the world change the observer, the observer detects this change.  The change is not "measured" in any way.  It is detected.  Detection is followed by an action that possibly changes other observers in the world.  Detection is any mechanism that causes an action.  There is only ONE action for any one observer.  (The action does NOT vary in force or duration or information that can be gathered about it.  However since an action is an interaction with the environment, its properties are affected by the environment. It remains unanswered if the action can be affected by the internal state.)  Detection is best described by when the change occured.  This time instance can be represented as a point on a time line.  This type of description leads to a mathematical construct called Point Process.  Periodic nature of these time points is related to study of coupled oscillators.

State change takes place in things dead or alive.  However only live observers can detect changes.  Other clumps of matter change their internal state but do not detect changes.  There are many mechanisms of change.  Photons, electrons, heat transfer, vibrations, pressure etc.. By abstracting away from these mechanisms of change, we can create a simple model.  This model can be applied to the real world or a simulation.

### Detection
I consider most of the statements above obvious.  Please email me if you disagree.  The difficult problems is to explain why DETECTION is the primary mechanism of information processing.  Anything that uses communication among "modules" suffers from a serious problem I describe below.  In my theory various mechanisms of change decouple observers.  There is no COMMUNICATION that takes place.

The purpose of DETECTION is to initiate an action in the world that will possibly change state of another observer.  This still does not answer why use detection to produce an action.  One could say that measuring the change in internal state can produce an action proportionate to the measure.  However a measure is a much more complex mechanism possibly involving an oscillator for timing.  Another problem is measuring involves delaying the action.  An action has to be delayed to measure different amounts of state change.  With state change detection, there is no delay.  Measurements are useless to other observers because that would imply there is communication taking place among observers.

The problem faced by systems where modules communicate is that modules have to agree on the mechanisms used for communication.  Symbols, numbers or levels used for communication have to be known prior to communication taking place.  One can argue that they can be learned by modules.  In this case the "protocol" is unique between each pair of modules.


### Implications
* My goal is to make this mechanism a standard tool in developing artificial intelligence systems.  Justifying why spiking ANNs is the way to go.
* I call the mechanism "perception".  There is a lot of controversy around using the word perception.  However it can model the transformation that takes place on the boundary of our bodies as well as information flow deep inside our brains far from sensory neurons.
* It can be reasoned that detection mechanism is one of the signatures of life. The other being ability to reproduce.
* Symantics or meaning can be reasoned about by specifying that a change is meaningful for a single observer only.
* The mechanism can be used in the study of causality.

toandrey(at)yahoo(dot)com  
April 30, 2021

Commit message:

changing readme.md to add analogy to coincidence detection

readme.md, after:

## Modeling and reasonging about information transfer in biological and artificial organisms.

This is a summary of my paper "Perception and Time in AGI".

One way of learning about any system is to divide it into parts and study interactions among the parts.  To model information flow in organisms they can be thought of as collections of observers receiving information from the outside world and "transmitting information" from one observer to another.  A neuron is an example of an observer.  However, in my theory I use words "change" and "action" instead of "receiving information" and "transmitting information".  This is a fundamental difference.  

Observation of processes in the world (everything outside of a single observer including other observers) changes that observer.  There are many mechanisms of change.  What changes within the observer is called "internal state".  State can be matter in the real world observers or bits in artificial ones.  Internal state is dilimited from the world by a boundary that defines the observer.  The boundaries can change over time, overlap or contain one another.  Information travels across the boundaries via numerous mechanisms that change the internal state.

When processes originating in the world change the observer, the observer detects this change.  The change is not "measured" in any way.  It is detected.  Detection is followed by an action that possibly changes other observers in the world.  Detection is any mechanism that causes an action.  There is only ONE action for any one observer.  (The action does NOT vary in force or duration or information that can be gathered about it.  However since an action is an interaction with the environment, its properties are affected by the environment. It remains unanswered if the action can be affected by the internal state.)  Detection is best described by when the change occured.  This time instance can be represented as a point on a time line.  This type of description leads to a mathematical construct called Point Process.  Periodic nature of these time points is related to study of coupled oscillators.

Coincidence detection mechanism (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coincidence_detection_in_neurobiology) can help explain detection mechanism described above.  Instead of detecting input signals, a change in the internal state, caused by input signals, is detected.  To quote wikipedia: "Synchronous arrival of two inputs may push the membrane potential of a target neuron over the threshold".  This is a mechanism of internal state (membrane potential) change.

State change takes place in things dead or alive.  However only live observers can detect changes.  Other clumps of matter change their internal state but rearly detect changes.  There are many mechanisms of change.  Photons, electrons, heat transfer, vibrations, pressure etc.. By abstracting away from these mechanisms of change, we can create a simple model.  This model can be applied to the real world or a simulation.

### Detection
I consider most of the statements above obvious.  Please email me if you disagree.  The difficult problems is to explain why DETECTION is the primary mechanism of information processing.  Anything that uses communication among "modules" suffers from a serious problem I describe below.  In my theory various mechanisms of change decouple observers.  There is no COMMUNICATION that takes place.

The purpose of DETECTION is to initiate an action in the world that will possibly change state of another observer.  This still does not answer why use detection to produce an action.  One could say that measuring the change in internal state can produce an action proportionate to the measure.  However a measure is a much more complex mechanism possibly involving an oscillator for timing.  Another problem is measuring involves delaying the action.  An action has to be delayed to measure different amounts of state change.  With state change detection, there is no delay.  Measurements are useless to other observers because that would imply there is communication taking place among observers.

The problem faced by systems where modules communicate is that modules have to agree on the mechanisms used for communication.  Symbols, numbers or levels used for communication have to be known prior to communication taking place.  One can argue that they can be learned by modules.  In this case the "protocol" is unique between each pair of modules.


### Implications
* My goal is to make this mechanism a standard tool in developing artificial intelligence systems.  Justifying why spiking ANNs is the way to go.
* I call the mechanism "perception".  There is a lot of controversy around using the word perception.  However it can model the transformation that takes place on the boundary of our bodies as well as information flow deep inside our brains far from sensory neurons.
* It can be reasoned that detection mechanism is one of the signatures of life. The other being ability to reproduce.
* Symantics or meaning can be reasoned about by specifying that a change is meaningful for a single observer only.
* The mechanism can be used in the study of causality.

toandrey(at)yahoo(dot)com  
April 30, 2021
